---
published: true
layout: post
title: "PS for .NET devs part 4: Source digging"
categories:
 - PowerShell
 - ps4.netdevs
keywords:
- PowerShell
- .NET
- Metrics
- .NET development
- Statistics
- code-base
- overview
- C#
--- 

The kind of adhoc scripting you can do with [PowerShell][1] lends it's
self very well for getting an overview of the code-base you find
yourself in. When you find yourself in a project or you're just
interested in some basic statistics/metrics about your code-base you
could follow something like the path I'm about to uncover. For brevity
and a real life flavor I'm using the short form aliases of the Cmdlets
look them up with `Get-Alias` if you find any that are unfamiliar.

#### How many files are actually in the archive?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec | measure
]]>
</script>
 
#### How many files of which type are there in the archive?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec | group Extension 
]]>
</script>

#### What are the most popular file types?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec | group Extension | sort -desc Count |
>>select -First 10
]]>
</script>

Ignoring directories the top 10 becomes:

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec | ?{ -not $_.PSIsContainer } | 
>>group Extension | sort -desc Count | select -First 10
]]>
</script>
C# is the main language here.

#### How many classes do we have?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>sls -pattern '\bclass\b' -allmatches | 
>>measure
]]>
</script>

##### Explanation

Consider all C# files search for the 'whole word' `class` and count
all the matches.

#### Do we have any tests?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -inc *Test*.cs | measure
]]>
</script>

Let's look at the first one to see which testing framework were using:

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -inc *Test*.cs | 
>>select -first 1 | 
>>gc | select -first 20
]]>
</script>

Ah, [NUnit][nunit] so,

#### How many test fixtures do we have:

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>sls -pattern '\[TestFixture\]' -allmatches |
>>measure
]]>
</script>

#### Lets check some basic line counts

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -exc *.exe,*.dll | measure -line -ignorw
]]>
</script>

##### Explanation
Going through all files in the archive exclude some known binary
types, count the number of lines excluding lines containing only
whitespace.

#### How are these lines distributed across the different file-types?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -exc *.exe,*.dll,*.zip,*.recipe,*.mdb,*.png,*.ov,*.bin,*.cd,*.pdb,*.mat |
>>?{ -not $_.PSIsContainer } | 
>>group Extension | 
>>Select Name, @{Name="LoC";Expr={ $_.group | %{ gc $_ } | 
>>measure -line -ignorew|select -expa Lines }} | sort LoC -desc | 
>>select -first 10 |ft -autosize Name,LoC
]]>
</script>

##### Explanation
- retrieve all files excluding a large number of binary file-types
specific to this project
- filter out the directories
- group the files by their extension
- select the Name of the group which will be the extension, calculate
  the total lines of code for all files in the group by 
  + retrieving the contents of each file using `gc` an alias for
    `Get-Content`
  + counting the number of lines
  + extracting the `Lines` property for the `Measure-Object` return
    value as a value, rather than an object containing only a `Lines`
    property 
- sort in descending order by the number of lines
- select the top 10
- format them in a table with auto-sized columns

#### What about the ratio of test vs. production code?

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: ps"><![CDATA[
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>group { sls -path $_ -pattern '\[TestFixture\]'` -quiet } | 
>>Select @{Name="TestOrProduction";
>>Exp={if ($_.Name -eq "True") { "Test" } else {"Production"}}},`
>>@{Name="LoC";Expr={ $_.group | %{ gc $_ } | measure -line -ignorew|
>> select -expa Lines }} | 
>>ft -autosize TestOrProduction,LoC
]]>
</script>

##### Explanation
The code follows the same pattern as above except that the grouping is
done on the fact whether the file is a `[TestFixture]` or not.


#### Epilogue
I believe that this shows what kind of awesome stuff you can do with
adhoc scripting using [PowerShell][1]. Until next time.

{% include date.inc %}

##### References

<div class="references">
<ul>
<li><a href='http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/scriptcenter/dd742419'
title='Scripting with Windows PowerShell'>Technet: Scripting with
Windows PowerShell</a></li>
<li><a href='http://nunit.org' 
title='NUnit a .NET unit-testing framework'>NUnit a .NET unit-testing framework</a></li>
</ul>
</div>

[1]: http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/scriptcenter/dd742419 "Scripting with Windows PowerShell"
[nunit]: http://nunit.org "NUnit a .NET unit-testing framework "
