+++
date = "2011-12-04"
title = "PS for .NET devs part 4: Source digging"
+++ 

The kind of adhoc scripting you can do with [PowerShell][1] lends it's
self very well for getting an overview of the code-base you find
yourself in. When you find yourself in a project or you're just
interested in some basic statistics/metrics about your code-base you
could follow something like the path I'm about to uncover. For brevity
and a real life flavor I'm using the short form aliases of the Cmdlets
look them up with `Get-Alias` if you find any that are unfamiliar.

#### How many files are actually in the archive?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec | measure
~~~

 
#### How many files of which type are there in the archive?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec | group Extension 
~~~


#### What are the most popular file types?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec | group Extension | sort -desc Count |
>>select -First 10
~~~


Ignoring directories the top 10 becomes:

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec | ?{ -not $_.PSIsContainer } | 
>>group Extension | sort -desc Count | select -First 10
~~~

C# is the main language here.

#### How many classes do we have?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>sls -pattern '\bclass\b' -allmatches | 
>>measure
~~~


##### Explanation

Consider all C# files search for the 'whole word' `class` and count
all the matches.

#### Do we have any tests?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -inc *Test*.cs | measure
~~~


Let's look at the first one to see which testing framework were using:

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -inc *Test*.cs | 
>>select -first 1 | 
>>gc | select -first 20
~~~


Ah, [NUnit][nunit] so,

#### How many test fixtures do we have:

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>sls -pattern '\[TestFixture\]' -allmatches |
>>measure
~~~


#### Lets check some basic line counts

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -exc *.exe,*.dll | measure -line -ignorw
~~~


##### Explanation
Going through all files in the archive exclude some known binary
types, count the number of lines excluding lines containing only
whitespace.

#### How are these lines distributed across the different file-types?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -exc *.exe,*.dll,*.zip,*.recipe,*.mdb,*.png,*.ov,*.bin,*.cd,*.pdb,*.mat |
>>?{ -not $_.PSIsContainer } | 
>>group Extension | 
>>Select Name, @{Name="LoC";Expr={ $_.group | %{ gc $_ } | 
>>measure -line -ignorew|select -expa Lines }} | sort LoC -desc | 
>>select -first 10 |ft -autosize Name,LoC
~~~


##### Explanation
- retrieve all files excluding a large number of binary file-types
specific to this project
- filter out the directories
- group the files by their extension
- select the Name of the group which will be the extension, calculate
  the total lines of code for all files in the group by 
  + retrieving the contents of each file using `gc` an alias for
    `Get-Content`
  + counting the number of lines
  + extracting the `Lines` property for the `Measure-Object` return
    value as a value, rather than an object containing only a `Lines`
    property 
- sort in descending order by the number of lines
- select the top 10
- format them in a table with auto-sized columns

#### What about the ratio of test vs. production code?

~~~ ps1
>ls -rec -inc *.cs | 
>>group { sls -path $_ -pattern '\[TestFixture\]' -quiet } | 
>>Select @{Name="TestOrProduction";
>>Exp={if ($_.Name -eq "True") { "Test" } else {"Production"}}},`
>>@{Name="LoC";Expr={ $_.group | %{ gc $_ } | measure -line -ignorew|
>> select -expa Lines }} | 
>>ft -autosize TestOrProduction,LoC
~~~


##### Explanation
The code follows the same pattern as above except that the grouping is
done on the fact whether the file is a `[TestFixture]` or not.


#### Epilogue
I believe that this shows what kind of awesome stuff you can do with
adhoc scripting using [PowerShell][1]. Until next time.



##### References

[Scripting with Windows PowerShell][1]
[NUnit a .NET unit-testing framework][nunit]

[1]: http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/scriptcenter/dd742419 "Scripting with Windows PowerShell"
[nunit]: http://nunit.org "NUnit a .NET unit-testing framework "
